# Network infrastructure

## Networks

NOC operates a number of networks, available as tagged VLANs on the core switches:

| Name     |  ID | DNS | CIDR                               | Comment                              |
|----------|-----|-----|------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| mgmt     |  32 | y   | 192.168.32.0/24                    | Management network                   |
| iot      |  33 | y   | 192.168.33.0/24                    | IoT devices, room infrastructure     |
| svc      |  34 | y   | 192.168.34.0/24                    | Services LAN, see below              |
| [HAMNET] |  44 | n   | 44.0.0.0/8                         | Amateur Radio Digital Communications |
| guests   | 127 | y   | 192.168.127.0/24                   | Exposed through the “realraum” SSIDs |
| members  | 128 | y   | 89.106.211.32/27, 192.168.128.0/24 | Accessed with per-member credentials |
| pub      | 130 | y   | 89.106.211.64/27                   | Publicly-available services          |
| UPC      | 168 | n   | <dynamically assigned>             | UPC DOCSIS Internet                  |
| `0xFF`   | 255 | n   | 10.12.240.240/28                   | Funkfeuer VLAN                       |

[HAMNET]: https://wiki.oevsv.at/index.php/Kategorie:Digitaler_Backbone


### `svc` -- Services LAN

This network is intended for services that aren't directly exposed to users
(be they humans or machines); this includes services exposed through a frontend
(like realraum web services) and services only meant to be consumed by another
service (like a database server).


### `pub` -- Publicly-available services

This network is intended for services that can be consumed by non-NOC systems,
including our HTTP(S) frontend -- `entrance`, `mqtt`, ...

Services in this network can restrict availability, for instance by only
allowing clients connecting from our LANs, or by requiring authentication.

No RFC 1918 subnet is used on this network, only `89.106.211.64/27`.


### Conventions

- The DNS zone for a given network is `NET.realraum.at`, with the exception of
  `pub` (which uses `realraum.at`) and VLANs which have no `realraum.at` zone.
- When a network uses RFC 1918 IP space, it is the 192.168.VID.0/24 subnet;
  for instance, the `iot` network has id 33 and uses the 192.168.33.0/24 subnet.
- The gateway for a network is on the last IP for the subnet.


### Routing and firewall rules

This network diagram represents networks, and the connection flows between them:
an arrow from A to B means that a connection can be opened from network A to
network B.  In all cases, a subset of ICMP (ECHO, ...) is allowed.

Note that any given system might have interfaces in several of these networks.

[[!img Network/overview.svg alt="r³ network overview"]]


## WiFi

Each location has a single AP, `ap{0,1}.mgmt.realraum.at`, which provides SSIDs
for the IoT network (`realstuff`) and the LAN (`realraum` and `realraum5`);
we use Ubiquity hardware running OpenWRT.


## Physical locations

The switches have hostnames `sw{0,1}.mgmt.realraum.at`, and the WiFi access
points are similarly `ap{0,1}.mgmt.realraum.at`. `0` denotes the main room, and
`1` denotes the second appartment.


### W2 -- Room 1

r1w2 has two fiber connections: one to the main room, and one to the radio room.
(We use fiber to avoid creating a ground loop between the locations.)

In r1w2, we have a rack hosting a number of devices:

- the patch panel and core switch (`sw1.mgmt.realraum.at`) for W2;
- the `alfred` virtualization server;
- miscelaneous devices:
  - RIPE ATLAS probe;
  - some Raspberry Pi belonging to members;
  - ...

**Note:** members setting up devices that only need power and network access
          should do so in this rack (or even better, run a VM or a container
          on `alfred`).


### W2 -- realfunk

realfunk receives the VLANs trunked on a single fiber; the switch there, `sw2`,
provides untagged ports on guests, `0xFF`, and HAMNET, which are labelled on the
device. Moreover, a single port (5) has the untagged guests LAN, along with
tagged HAMNET packets, used by the desktop computer there.

Moreover, there is a Funkfeuer node there; it *does not* advertise the realraum
SSIDs.


### Main room

The main room has its patch panel and core switch (`sw0.mgmt.realraum.at`) in
Cx. The patch panel has a fiber link to r2w1, and a copper link to an external
antenna for our link to Funkfeuer.

The network shelf in Cx also houses some important devices:

- `gw.realraum.at`;
- `smsgw.mgmt.realraum.at`, plus its mobile phone;
- the PoE injectors for `ap0.mgmt.realraum.at` and `sch24.r3.ffgraz.net`;
- `test.r3.ffgraz.net`, which is a test Funkfeuer node.
